# Development Book

- [Development Book](#development-book)
  - [Team Members and Roles](#team-members-and-roles)
  - [Background and Project Description](#background-and-project-description)
    - [Project Idea](#project-idea)
    - [Summary](#summary)
    - [Goals](#goals)
    - [Scope](#scope)
  - [Project Requirements](#project-requirements)
    - [Stakeholders](#stakeholders)
    - [Input](#input)
    - [Processing](#processing)
    - [Output](#output)
  - [Technologies Used](#technologies-used)
  - [Design Patterns](#design-patterns)
    - [Factory Method](#factory-method)
  - [Timeline](#timeline)

## Team Members and Roles

- **Ike Chukwunyerenwa**  
  Database Developer
- **Alex Ketavongsa**  
  Frontend Developer
- **Tyler Pache**  
  Full-Stack Developer
- **Rachael Simmonds**  
  Frontend Developer
- **Tim Tills**  
  Backend Developer / Database Developer

## Background and Project Description

### Project Idea

Spoonacular Inc. Recipe Database

### Summary

The CEO of "Spoonacular Inc." has reached out to us to create a database based on their business - recipes. They have been struggling with world-wide profits of their recipe book because shipping and handling cost is greater in most international countries. They want us to create this online database in order for those around the world and/or locally want quicker and cheaper access to their recipes through an online database.

Within the database, we would like the users/customers to be able to get a name of the recipe they want to access based on what the database provides, a date of when the recipe was accessed by them, what time they started to view the recipe, what time they completed viewing the recipe, and perhaps the quality of how the food turned out for overall feedback for the company to improve their recipes within the database for other consumers.

The users will be able to have access to the recipes through a database based on what food/recipe they look up within the database. The database should also allow the consumers to create new recipes in case they do not follow the exact recipe within the database, which they could create their own personal set of recipes that will be public to the “Spoonacular” database. Our database system will allow consumers to filter recipes based on the ingredients they provide or search for. We want their consumers to have easy access to the customer's recipes on an online database without paying a fortune in order to get it. This project should boost our customers sales world-wide.

### Goals

Our biggest goal is to make our customer happy but also be able to meet all of their desired requirements for the online database for their recipes. We want to be able to follow the standards to create the database so its functionality will not have any hiccups while the customer's consumers are utilizing it.

First we need to create a design that is able to be structured in time for our customer's needs. Second our tables should be linked in a way that is not repetitive which leaves the database structure looking redundant. Third, all the information in the database should be correct and correctly formatted. If a consumer is trying to make the recipe "spaghetti" that recipe should not return faulty ingredients such as "1 chocolate bar." We want accuracy within each table when a consumer is using the database. This should be thought about logically while inserting information into the database.

### Scope

Over the course of this project, we will create an application that is able to:
- Let users login and register accounts
- Search recipes based on name and ingredients
- Record when the user accessed each recipe
- Record how long the user spent looking at a recipe
- Record feedback generated by the user about how their food turned out
- Record new recipes created by users

This application will use a client-server architecture, with a server-side written in Node.js and a client-side written in React.js. The client and server will communicate via a REST API, and the server will interface with a database to store persistent data.

## Project Requirements

### Stakeholders

The stakeholders in this project will be the customers, managers, developers, and vendors. The customers are responsible for establishing design requirements as well as using and running the system. The customer's interaction is between the vendors who provide the goods and services. The developers are responsible for adhering to the design requirements and writing the code. The managers are responsible for meeting deadlines and budgets. The managers are dependent on the vendors to communicate the customer's requirements to the developer. The vendors are responsible for ensuring that the application is cross-compatible with their platform.

### Input

In regards to input the application will need to handle input from the user when looking for specific items in addition to handling authentication and authorization. For a new user they will need to go through the process of entering in their information to create an account. If the user already has an account they will need to login to their account to view/edit saved recipes, add recipes of their own.

With this the application will need to be able to accept the various fields necessary for recipes from: ingredients, instructions, serving size, cuisine and possibly nutrition facts. On the opposite end, a user looking to find a recipe will need to be able to input the ingredients they have and be shown a list of possible recipes they can make from the list they provided.

### Processing

The app will handle calls to a database as well as to an API. The calls to the database will be to verify login values from the consumers and keep track of saved recipe lists from the database. Users will also be able to add, delete and modify their own recipes into the database to be able to share with other users. The calls to the API will be based on the ingredients provided by the user, specific to the recipe names.

In addition, the application will process the information passed in by the user and will clean it to make sure there will be no injections made to the databases. This will allow the application to be safer overall for all involved.

### Output

The output refers to any information requested within the database for recipes being processed by a server within the computer to be sent back to the consumer. This allows the consumers to view recipes without waiting extensive amounts of time.

An example of the output is that any recipe that is viewed by the user on their computer monitor lets him and/or her look at the information, such as ingredients or steps, when the output is coming out. After he and/or she requested for his and/or her information, such as ingredients, he and/or she inputs through a keyboard. The goal is to make sure that the consumer of our customer gets information from what he and/or she has requested and to make sure it is valid information. 

As the developers, we are focusing on how MySQL executes statements within the recipe database. It will explain how to return a row of information for each table used in the query which includes: `SELECT`, `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, and `DELETE` statements or our C.R.U.D. The tables listed in the output in the correct order that MySQL would allow us to read all the tables listed while running the statements.

## Technologies Used

- Server side
  - Data Layer
    - **MySQL**  
      Production-ready database
    - **SQLite**  
      Embedded DBMS good for local development and testing
  - Business Layer
    - **Node.js**  
      Server-side Javascript runtime
    - **Express.js**  
      Simplifies the creation of REST APIs
- Client side
  - Presentation Layer
    - **React.js**  
      Frontend framework for constructing reactive user interfaces
    - **Redux**  
      Manages application state in a functional style
    - **Material UI**  
      Provides reusable components following the Material Design guidelines

## Design Patterns

### Factory Method

This application will be built to use either of 2 DBMSs, SQLite and MySQL. In order to use both effectively, abstraction classes implementing the same interface need to be created from their respective drivers, and a configuration file will need to be interpreted to decide which database type will be used.

A factory method can be used to decide which class will be instantiated, with a general form that looks like:

```js
const { sqlite } = require("./drivers/sqlite");
const { mysql } = require("./drivers/mysql");

const dbTypes = {
  sqlite,
  mysql
};

module.exports.createDBConnection = config => {
  if(config.db.type in dbTypes){
    return new dbTypes[config.db.type](config.db.opts);
  }
};
```

## Timeline

| Milestones                                | Meeting Start Date/Time   | Meeting End Date/Time   | Due Date                  |
| ----------------------------------------- | ------------------------- | ----------------------- | ------------------------- |
| Milestone 01. Requirements                | Aug 20, 2020, 4 PM        | Aug 26, 2020, 6 PM      | Aug 31, 2020, 11:59 PM    |
| Milestone 02. Design and Design Patterns  | Sept 18, 2020, 4 PM       | Sept 18, 2020, 6 PM     | Sept 18, 2020, 11:59 PM   |
| Milestone 03. Layering                    | Sept 23, 2020, 4 PM       | Sept 23, 2020, 6 PM     | Sept 25, 2020, 11:59 PM   |
| Milestone 04. Exception Handling          | Oct 7, 2020, 4 PM         | Oct 7, 2020, 6 PM       | Oct 9, 2020, 11:59 PM     |
| Milestone 05. Performance and Refactoring | Oct 21, 2020, 4 PM        | Oct 21, 2020, 6 PM      | Oct 23, 2020, 11:59 PM    |
| Milestone 06. Testing                     | Nov 6, 2020, 4 PM         | Nov 6, 2020, 6 PM       | Nov 9, 2020, 11:59 PM     |
| Milestone 07. Deploying, Packaging        | Nov 11, 2020, 4 PM        | Nov 11, 2020, 6 PM      | Nov 13, 2020, 11:59 PM    |
| Finalized Code                            | Nov 18, 2020, 4 PM        | Nov 18, 2020, 6 PM      | Nov 20, 2020, 6 PM        |
